
# Todomvc

 A [todomvc](http://todomvc.com) implementation using [jsiom](//github.com/jsiom/app). To run it just clone the repo and run `make`

## Analysis

Jsiom enabled me to write this app in a declarative style which is obviously a massive win over the normal explicitly mutative style I'm used to. Not only was it easier to write but the end result is actually better. For example I in the render function I declared that if no todos are currently being edited then the cursor should be in the todo creation box otherwise it should be in the todo that is being edited and automatically this meant that when the user finishes editing a todo the cursor will go back to the todo creation box. Normally this would of been an explicit feature. Also whenever the user closes the window and later opens it again it will return to the exact state it was last in. Even down to putting the cursor in a todo if they were in the middle of editing one. Plus accidental page refreshes are completely harmless which is a nice feature for users. Also a really nice undo/redo should be super easy to implement and it could even be persisted across page refreshes. That feature would be ridiculously hard to implement in the mutative style of programming.

And perhaps surprisingly page load is really really fast. Actually faster than the [vanillajs](http://todomvc.com/examples/vanillajs) implementation since it doesn't mutate the DOM while rendering. So the browser doesn't have to keep re-rendering the interface during initialization. So declarative programming is very much a win all around for this particular application. I think it will be interesting to see how a more interaction heavy application would turn out though. I suspect it could take a bit of experimentation to find an approach which isn't worse in some way compared to the explicit mutation approach. Most probably it will only be a performance issue but will be interesting to see. I think animations could be much nicer in the declarative approach however since it will remove the need to explicitly cancel animations that get canceled before they complete.

There was one major pain point in this app though and that was with the [immutable-js](//github.com/facebook/immutable-js) library. The concept of cursors is really nice but the library in general is __extremely__ leaky to use. Almost everywhere I interact with immutable-js I had to do some verbose hack to cover edge cases. To be fair its not easy to implement the abstractions in immutable-js robustly in JS. And immutable-js's implementation is already complicated enough as it is. So perhaps what we are seeing is more a limitation in the abstraction capability of the language more than just a bad library. I can't wait till [Julia](//github.com/JuliaLang/julia) can be compiled to JS.
